---
title: "Reasons for brutal geometric order to evolve"
---

> But even so, as we try to create this kind of soft order, there comes a time, inevitably, when we (as architects or builders) have to *impose*. We have to create a geometry that comes almost from the space itself, from the discipline of rectangles (because spaces are mainly rectangular), and from the discipline of equal or nearly equal structural bays (because structural bays are, by and large, roughly equal and regular). So we need to introduce this almost alien, slightly rigid, formal order of the built nature of a building, into the soft landscape of surrounding forms.  
> And no matter how subtle we may try to be, this “something” which needs to be introduced is something inevitably alien. It has its own laws, it is deeply regular or massively crystalline, and its regularity may seem — and sometimes *must* actually *be* — brutal in a certain sense, because it comes from *itself*.  
> *By that I mean that it comes from the need for the internal geometrical coherence of the building, not from the surroundings.* Of course, as we introduce this formal geometry, work it, care for it, we do our best to make it harmonious, we tame it, we introduce necessary irregularities to make it fit the surroundings as well as possible. We fit it to the terrain, the idiosyncracies of street and site and neighboring volume.  
> This makes it more harmonious, not purely rigid or crystalline. The regularities flow with the land, the structure adjusts to subtleties of interior plan, and all thereby becomes softer. And, of course, we have made the decision about the geometric form — *which* rectangles, *how* big, just *how* brutal? — on the basis of a volumetric conception and a conception of positive space which all have their origin in the land. So it is reasonable to hope that from that origin, too, the geometry will not be brutal; will, of we are successful, have a balance of geometrical hardness and terrain-induced or interior-induced softness.  

*There is something here about inherent structure that software shares as well, and the process seems to be about integrating that inherent structure with its environment, on both larger and smaller scales. The larger scale being the environment it needs to fit into, the smaller scale being the actions and behaviors it needs to afford.*

> But in spite of these reasons for hoping that what we do may after all end up soft, well-adapted, comfortably fitted to the harmony of what exists, and thus be structure-preserving to the world, there is at the kernel of the whole process, an inevitable moment of truth which really is rather brutal, the moment when geometry, coming about for its own sake, imposes a discipline of its own that *must* be introduced.  
> No matter how hard we work to make the building in harmony as far as possible with what exists around it and with the subtleties of its interior plan, still, taking this step is undeniably a brutal act, frightening for an artist who has sensibility for the beauty and softness of the land and of what others have built before him. *Yet it is from this moment of brutality, that real order must come.* The moment cannot be avoided. The nature of artistic creation — even, we may say, the biological character of order itself — demands it.  
> It is this injection of definite, strong, geometrical order that allows the profound depth of the made thing — the building in the land — and it is from this that the order must and will arise.  

#book/The Nature of Order/2 The process of creating life/15 Emergence of formal geometry#