---
title: "The generation of monsters"
---

> Above all there is, in today’s society, an overall atmosphere, a quality of attitude and fact which again and again and again, seem to **conspire to make living process difficult, even impossible**.  
> The problem is so severe that — if it were not absurd — one might almost imagine that **modern society has been created, intentionally, to make living process hard to implement**, to drive it from the door.  

> Living processes […] are *morphogenetic*.   
> They **create form intentionally and explicitly**.   
> They are *directly* aimed at the unfolding of life, they have the unfolding of living structure as their *goal*.   
> Modern processes, for the most part, are not morphogenetic. The thousands of processes I have referred to in chapter 18, exist very much *as a fragmented multitude*. They are **not ordered, not coordinated, not coherent as a system**.  

> It is as if — and indeed this is true — the society which spawned the 20th-century processes, did so **without realizing that these processes would have morphological effects**. The effects are chiefly negative. Even when positive, they are clumsy, awkward. Thus 20th-century society, in respect of modern apartment buildings, entered a kind of monster phase, a Frankenstein phase, where **government decisions indirectly generated horrible living conditions without intending to**.  
> If this bad effect were confined only to apartment buildings, that would already be bad enough. But comparable effects exist in almost every part of urban and rural society.  
> Bad conditions and bad building form are **generated indirectly by regulations, processes, and influences**, in almost every part of a modern urban region; and their bad effects come from the **deepest layers of ethos, practice, and assumption**, often spread pervasively and forming the substratum of society.  

> The effects of bad-structure-generating social process are hideously widespread. The rules and processes that have been introduced do generate a world. But they generate a world that is destroyed, that strongly lacks living structure. And, they do so with a ferocity and speed which could make someone from outer space believe — if it were not patently absurd — that it is being done on purpose.  
> How could rules, laws, and processes which generate such obviously harmful structures, have been introduced and replicated throughout modern society, unless it were on purpose?  
> Yet of course, it is not on purpose. It is all *by mistake*. And it is by means of a very particular kind of mistake. We, the first children of the modern age, have not yet understood the huge extent to which *the physical structure of the world is generated by its processes*.  
> The processes do have huge impact on the way the world is shaped. But these impacts are **most often unintended, tangential**. So **the structure-*destroying* transformations which run rampant in creating our modern environment are on the loose, uncontrolled, created by idiot processes for which no one takes morphogenetic responsibility**. We have let loose a system that creates monsters. And we do not even realize that it is we who created this system of processes and we who continue to let is loose!  

#book/The Nature of Order/2 The process of creating life/19 Massive process difficulties#