---
title: 13 Morphological invariants likely to appear in individual realms when generated by living process
---

> Individual houses, individual apartments, workplaces, gardens, rooms, when made living, are adapted to individual conditions and to individual people. They have a character that allows people’s individuality to be lived through. Each place is unique, personal to the individuals, “unique in all the world” — and because of all that is a place which people can love.  
> This uniqueness of every part, like the uniqueness of leaves on a tree or roses on a rosebush, is a necessary part of a living order.  
> In any mass situation which requires repetition of houses, or repetition of apartments, or repetition of offices, it is good to bear the following in mind. Once generic patterns have been established, it is relatively easy to generate local individual variations in a genuine and practical way. You can do it by inventing processes, like those I have illustrated, which give each individual the power to create the configuration of their individual house or apartment or office. Such a process can easily be constructed so that silly mistakes will not occur, and so that the process virtually guarantees that each person will be able to make a coherent design.  

*Idea: DSLs to declaratively specify such local variants of an arrangement of entities established by a pattern language.*

> In general, the geometry will be created by differentiation, not by addition or accretion, the parts given their dimensions by differentiating operations within the space of the land, or within the space of the room where the thing is being made.  

#book/The Nature of Order/3 A Vision of a Living World/12 The uniqueness of people’s individual worlds#