---
title: The possibility of a coherent verifiable theory
---

> Some readers, kind enough to be enthusiastic, do see it as a possible picture, a helpful and poetic picture. Their enthusiasm is, of course, positive. But it is still a far cry from thinking or acknowledging that it *might* be true, to seeing that this picture actually *is* true. If it is poetically satisfying, one can be inspired by it. It can help people to think about architecture in a more constructive way. But, if the theory were actually *true*, if our picture of the nature of space and time *requires* modification to include the I, and if such a modification of our physical picture ultimately turned out to be a real feature of the universe, then that would be a discovery, an intellectual waking up of a very different order — something vast in its implications.
> 
> When thinking as a scientist, it must of course be this question of truth which occupies one’s mind. It is for this reason that I have kept records, and written down my observations, for the last thirty years, as carefully as possible. As a result of my observations, and as a result of my experiences in the field — as an architect building buildings, as a craftsman making things, as a planner laying out buildings and precincts and seeing them come to life — I have gradually become convinced that this theory, or at least something very much like it, is indeed *likely* to be true. In short, as a scientist, I have gradually come to the belief that the I must be real. And as a architect, I have also become convinced that the I is certainly real in buildings, and must necessarily play a fundamental role in architecture.

(Page 136)