---
title: Book 3 Cliff Notes
---

- [[Part 1]]
- [[Part 2]]

---

- Author's note
	* [[Freshness and deep adaptation — the class of living buildings]]
- Preface
	1. [[My intention in book 3]]
	2. [[Repeated application of living process in city and in countryside]]
	3. [[A historical example of a living process]]
	4. [[Examples of life-creating processes from our era]]
	5. [[The continuous flow of creation in a region of the world]]
	6. [[Widely spread life-creating processes]]
	7. [[b3 c0 s7 conclusion|Conclusion]]
- 1 belonging and not-belonging
	1. [[1 Who, today, can truly enjoy belonging to the earth]]?
	2. [[2 The uniqueness of individuals, families, and businesses]]
	3. [[3 The living room of society]]
	4. [[4 Interlock of private and public, and continuous spatial touching of the two]]
	5. [[5 The impact of living process on belonging]]
	6. [[6 An invariant morphology which will be generated by living process]]
- 2 our belonging to the world
	1. [[1 The link of human happiness with the environment]]
	2. [[2 Belonging and true comfort]]
	3. [[3 The fifteen properties]]
	4. [[4 Dependence of the blissful state of our existence on the most ordinary quality in our surroundings]]
	5. [[5 The sense of belonging]]
	6. [[6 More on the blissful state]]
	8. [[8 The true landscape of architecture]]
	9. [[9 Attaining the blissful state]]
	10. [[10 Paintings and photographs of the blissful state]]
	11. [[11 Geometrical consequences: structural effects of living process in the realm of belonging]]
	12. [[12 Conclusion]]
- 3 the hulls of public space
	1. [[1 The unfolding of public space]]
	2. [[2 Positive space]]
	3. [[3 How hulls of public space come naturally from structure-preserving transformations]]
	4. [[4 Shaped public space forming living centers]]
	5. [[5 The spine structure of the Eishin campus]]
	6. [[6 The hulls of public space for a community of families in Texas: unexpected centers in a piece of land]]
	7. [[7 Shaping the hulls for part of a new town in greater Frankfurt]]
	8. [[8 A new approach to urban space: first forming a three-dimensional plan of hulls]]
	9. [[9 Implementation]]
	10. [[10 Summary of the effects]]
	11. [[11 Morphological features of public space created by living processes]]
- 4 large public buildings
	1. [[1 How large buildings may be created by the fundamental process]]
	2. [[2 The Great Hall: a multitude of living centers]]
	3. [[3 Intimacy of design within the huge]]
	4. [[4 Mountain View Civic Center: differentiation of a large building as a jewel, made by successive transformations of the space where it exists]]
	5. [[5 Tokyo Forum: unfolding of a massive building]]
	6. [[6 Eurostar]]
	7. [[7 Introduction to discussion of process for a larger building]]
	8. [[8 Even in the biggest building, people must be the core. The building genuinely comes from the inspiration and deep feeling of the users]]
	9. [[9 The contracting problem]]
	10. [[10 Emergence of new multi-level contracts for large buildings]]
	11. [[11 The intricacy of detail in a living process — Memos on construction method]]
	12. [[12 Conceptual vision of a still larger process]]
	13. [[13 Setting up a design management construction organization for a 16 million building]]
	14. [[14 Conclusion — Geometric features which follow from the use of living process in the making of large buildings]]
- 5 the positive pattern of space and volume in three dimensions on the land
	1. [[1 The all-important relationship between buildings and the land]]
	2. [[2 Every building is placed and shaped to form a positive pattern of space]]
	3. [[3 A lock-and-key process]]
	4. [[4 The Millennium Church]]
	5. [[5 Emergence of complex space and volume on a small piece of land in California]]
	6. [[6 Building a five-story building in Tokyo to make harmonious space and volume]]
	7. [[7 Laying out a very large building complex: the Eishin Campus]]
	7. [[7a Completion of design and construction of the Eishin Campus]]
	8. [[8 A secondary structure-enhancing process which further forms the shape of spaces and volumes]]
	9. [[9 Emergence of building volumes in a more repetitive project]]
	10. [[10 The most vital step in any building process]]
	11. [[11 Remember that each building exists mainly to activate the land]]
- 6 positive space in engineering structure and geometry
	1. [[1 Beauty of structure and positive space]]
	2. [[2 Interlocking elements of mass and elements of space]]
	3. [[3 Positive space and positive structure — a three-dimensional carpet of space]]
	4. [[4 The seeming miracle: why beauty of space and mass generates good engineering structure]]
	5. [[5 Three-dimensional formation of positive and negative]]
	6. [[6 The great hall at Eishin]]
	7. [[7 A new kind of engineering design process based on finite element analysis]]
	8. [[8 Using the fundamental process to get the design of a concrete truss]]
	9. [[9 Going on with the unfolding process for the truss: finite element analysis]]
	10. [[10 Each step uses the fundamental process to unfold an earlier wholeness]]
	11. [[11 Appropriate structural order for a large apartment building]]
	12. [[12 Morphological invariants that are likely to appear in an engineering structure generated by living process]]
- 7 the character of gardens
	1. [[1 The partial, built shell that lets a garden grow]]
	2. [[2 A sequence of adaptive acts]]
	3. [[3 Thus the living aspect of gardens comes about, necessarily, as a result of unfolding in time]]
	4. [[4 It unfolds directly from people’s ordinary instincts]]
	5. [[5 A comment from the heart of zen]]
	6. [[6 The built support that natural gardens need]]
	7. [[7 Twenty percent of the construction money for outdoor structures]]
	8. [[8 Positive space in gardens]]
	9. [[9 Preserve the structure of what is there]]
	10. [[10 Small and large centers contribute to unfolding]]
	11. [[11 Centers in your own garden, created by your desire]]
	12. [[12 The wild and cultivated garden]]
	13. [[13 Splendor in ordinariness]]
	14. [[14 I don’t care kind of caring]]
	15. [[15 The structure likely to appear in gardens shaped by living process]]
- 8 forming a collective vision of a neighborhood
	1. [[1 A shared vision]]
	2. [[2 The psychiatrists of Letterman Hospital]]
	3. [[3 Unfolding as a source of unanimity]]
	4. [[4 Start of a collective vision in Fort Lauderdale]]
	5. [[5 Design charettes]]
	6. [[6 A collective vision growing in Chikusadai]]
	7. [[7 The visionary process]]
	8. [[8 A collective vision achieved at Eishin]]
	9. [[9 We created: they created]]
	10. [[10 The vital need for a collective vision]]
	11. [[11 The archetypal character of the collective vision which will inevitably emerge]]
	12. [[12 Bologna]]
	13. [[13 The special character of each community created by the collective language they have made]]
- 9 the reconstruction of an urban neighborhood
	1. [[1 A growing city]]
	2. [[2 Addressing the problem of blight]]
	3. [[3 A new kind of zoning law, helping to generate neighborhood structure through successive transformations]]
	4. [[4 A profound contrast between two very different forms]]
	5. [[5 The pattern of yellow, green, gray, and red]]
	6. [[6 What should be the pattern of yellow, green, gray, and red]]?
	7. [[7 Making a start in the existing Progresso neighborhood]]
	8. [[8 Density interactions and the density threshold]]
	9. [[9 The key idea: within an optimum density framework, center-enhancing transformations of the neighborhood]]
	10. [[10 Yellow: growing the pedestrian hull]]
	11. [[11 Gray: Splitting lots and multiplication of smaller-scale individual buildings]]
	12. [[12 Green: the growth of positive green space]]
	13. [[13 Red: cars are given last place]]
	14. [[14 Overview of all four processes together]]
	15. [[15 Structure-preserving unfolding of the four-fold pattern of yellow, green, gray, and red]]
	16. [[16 Repairing blight]]
	17. [[17 Highly complex order — the key invariants in a neighborhood]]
- 10 "belonging" in high-density housing
	1. [[1 A question]]
	2. [[2 A vital comment about people’s wishes]]
	3. [[3 A direct sequence of logical steps leading from people’s wishes to a useful geometric form]]
	4. [[4 Shiratori: a new form of high-density housing at 80 families per acre: detailed explanation]]
	5. [[5 Chikusasai: 40 families per acre]]
	6. [[6 Evaluation of the Shiratori and Chikusadai plans]]
	7. [[7 A possible world-wide archetype]]
	8. [[8 Some invariants for high-density housing]]
- 11 necessary further dynamics of any neighborhood which comes to life
	0. [[Important note: simulation and reality]]
	1. [[1 The stuff of life]]
	2. [[2 The essential reason for dynamic thinking]]
	3. [[3 Santa Rosa de Cabal, Columbia]]
	4. [[4 Feedback, diagnosis and repair]]
	5. [[5 Laying out a larger neighborhood by a dynamic process: a fully generated plan]]
	6. [[6 Moshav Shorashim in the Galilee]]
	7. [[7 The Fort Mason bench]]
	8. [[8 Doing work together]]
	9. [[9 Some morphological invariants that will typically be generated by the fundamental process in any evolving neighborhood]]
- 12 the uniqueness of people’s individual worlds
	1. [[1 Every place will be unique]]
	2. [[2 Three houses by telephone]]
	3. [[3 A house for Geoffrey and Linda Gioja]]
	4. [[4 A house for Jim and Sylvia Heisey]]
	5. [[5 A house for Mike and Patricia Goddu]]
	6. [[6 Overview of the unfolding process for the three houses]]
	7. [[7 A paradox about uniqueness]]
	8. [[8 Mass-housing with unique apartments]]
	9. [[9 A factory and its individual workspaces]]
	10. [[10 Office layout process]]
	11. [[11 Mass-housing where each family make their own house plan for themselves]]
	12. [[12 How symmetries and asymmetries get created]]
	13. [[13 Morphological invariants likely to appear in individual realms when generated by living process]]
- 13 the character of rooms
	0. [[A few invariants of rooms that have been shaped by living process]]
	1. [[1 What makes a good room]]?
	2. [[2 Position: How living process may be used to shape a room through its position]]
	3. [[3 Position: Starting with the most important room]]
	4. [[4 Position: The living room of the Medlock House]]
	5. [[5 The main centers of a room: internal elements which create the room’s life]]
	6. [[6 The main centers of the carpet gallery at the San Francisco Museum]]
	7. [[7 Fine structure which determines the internal coherence and feeling in the room]]
	8. [[8 Fine structure: the Berryessa staircase]]
	9. [[9 Tranquility]]
	10. [[10 Tranquility even in the huge]]
- 14 construction elements as living centers
	1. [[1 The most decisive, most telling aspect]]
	2. [[2 Physical substance itself]]
	3. [[3 Microstructure of a building]]
	4. [[4 Microstructure as a necessary part of all physical organization]]
	5. [[5 Mirrors of the self in every building detail]]
	6. [[6 Unfolding building details from the fundamental process]]
	7. [[7 For living elements like these, a new form of making is required]]
	8. [[8 A letter to the reader]]
	9. [[9 Some invariants which will emerge when the fundamental process is repeatedly applied to building elements]]
- 15 all building as making
	1. [[1 A personal note]]
	2. [[2 Making]]
	3. [[3 Technical definition of “making”]]
	4. [[4 The most basic feature of living structure]]
	5. [[5 The technology of making]]
	6. [[6 The social philosophy of making]]
	7. [[7 The nearest tenth of an inch]]
	8. [[8 Detailed shape and size of capitals at Back-of-the Moon]]
	9. [[9 Money and contracts]]
	10. [[10 Working on integrated wholes]]
	11. [[11 Matura as an example]]
	12. [[12 Wabi-to-sabi: the balance of rough and smooth]]
	13. [[13 Summary]]
	14. [[14 Morphological invariants created when making goes according to a living process]]
- 16 continuous invention of new materials and techniques
	1. [[1 The search for new materials]]
	2. [[2 Green materials and adaptation]]
	3. [[3 What matters is that we have techniques of construction which help us make living centers]]
	4. [[4 An innovation for village construction — stacked tile vaults]]
	5. [[5 Cheap and beautiful ways of forming concrete]]
	5. [[5a Wood and concrete combinations]]
	6. [[6 Heavy wood construction]]
	7. [[7 New forms of brick and block construction]]
	8. [[8 Sophisticated may mean advanced or it may mean primitive in appearance but advanced in content]]
	9. [[9 Smooth unfolding of construction]]
	10. [[10 The paradigm of smooth unfolding as a target for every construction technique]]
	11. [[11 Monocoque construction — new forms of hollow, composite, wood and plywood columns and beams]]
	12. [[12 Concrete monocoque construction — a currently emerging structural technique]]
	13. [[13 Features of new building methods that are likely to appear if the technique is genuinely able to support a living process]]
- 17 the production of giant projects
	1. [[1 How may we approach truly gigantic construction projects]]
	2. [[2 High-speed adaptive production: technical problems that must be solved]]
	3. [[3 Slowly created harmony in a massive project: the example of the Athens Megatron]]
	4. [[4 The core of the solution: a combination of large numbers, high speed, minute adaptations, craft, and cost control]]
	5. [[5 Adaptive design emerging within the whole]]
	6. [[6 The water-jet cutter]]
	7. [[7 Prefabrication of marble on fiberglass mats followed by on-site modification and context-determined design adjustment]]
	8. [[8 Repetition and variation]]
	9. [[9 Human beings and technology: personal feeling interacts with fast, efficient, high technology to create a unified artistic and adaptive process]]
	10. [[10 Fabrication of luminous glass ceilings]]
	11. [[11 Extension of ultra-modern techniques to all forms of innovation and construction]]
- 18 ornament as part of all unfolding
	1. [[1 Ornament as products of unfolding]]
	2. [[2 Ornament as detail which emerges directly from the process of making]]
	3. [[3 Black-and-white marble floors and surfaces]]
	4. [[4 Making a colored, ornamented, floor]]
	5. [[5 Other kinds of ornament]]
	6. [[6 Hand-glazed tilework]]
	7. [[7 Making lifelike animals and plants in the fabric of the building]]
	8. [[8 Simplicity of ornamental human figures]]
	9. [[9 Structural qualities created by the fundamental process in all ornament]]
	10. [[10 In a living building, everything is ultimately ornament]]
	11. [[11 Everything is joyful ornament]]
- 19 color which unfolds from the configuration
	1. [[1 The unfolding which produces inner light]]
	2. [[2 The painted kitchen]]
	3. [[3 Paint and color materials]]
	4. [[4 The surprising nature of the color that unfolds]]
	5. [[5 The blue of the Kaiser house]]
	6. [[6 Another case of the surprising nature of color that unfolds]]
	7. [[7 How can it really be that color and design come from unfolding]]?
	8. [[8 Color is so effortless]]
	9. [[9 Morphological invariants which appear as living color unfolds]]
- 20 summation: the morphology of living architecture
	1. [[1 Emergence of an archetypal core]]
	2. [[2 A collection of examples]]
	3. [[3 Process and geometry: the origin of archetypal form]]
	4. [[4 Centers and symmetries]]
	5. [[5 The feeling-symmetry principle within these examples]]
	6. [[6 The archetype underlying all]]
	7. [[7 Weak archetype, strong archetype]]
	8. [[8 A last remark]]
- appendix on number
	- [[How many possible living structures are there]]?
- conclusion: the world created and transformed
	1. [[1 Architecture as the continuation and completion of the land: how continuous unfolding of wholeness makes and remakes the earth]]
	2. [[2 All urban building viewed as part of nature]]
	3. [[3 The world originating from its people]]
	4. [[4 Our birthright]]